[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
I'm George Noory.
Now, our special guest does not
really require an introduction,
but I'm going to anyways.
His name is, of course,
James Van Praagh.
He's a spiritual teacher.
And he is one of the
best in the business.
He's a medium.
And he's had consultancy jobs
with network television shows--
"Ghost Whisperer."
He is one of a kind.
He's had his own
programs on Gaia.
And he's with us right
now on "Beyond Belief."
James, always a pleasure
to see you here.
>>JAMES VAN PRAAGH:
Always a pleasure, George.
Thank you very much.
>>NOORY: I got to tell you.
When you were on a couple
years ago on my radio show,
"Coast to Coast" and
then the calls come
in after the interview,
they came in two hours later
after you were off
the air with me.
I had a different guest on
talking about something else.
They wanted to talk to you.
They don't stop.
>>VAN PRAAGH: It does happen.
I was on "Larry King" once.
And I had calls in
for "Friday Night."
We started a show--
"Friday Night Show."
And the show ended at 9:00.
And the calls didn't stop
until Sunday afternoon.
[LAUGHTER]
So people do call in for it.
Yeah.
>>NOORY: What is it
about the other side that
fascinates people?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I think
there's a natural curiosity
that every single person has, of
course, about life after death.
Because they know about birth.
They've been through that.
But they don't know what
to expect for death.
Is there such thing as death?
And how could he
know more about it?
So they want to-- that's really
what they want to know about.
What is it like?
>>NOORY: Does it scare them--
death?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I think for a
lot of people who don't know
about it, it does scare them.
I think ignorance is bliss.
I think knowledge is power.
And I think through
the work that I've done
and for myself as well, I'm
not afraid of death at all.
I look forward to it when
it happens, because it's
our graduation to go home.
Because this isn't our home.
This is just our
temporary station here.
And I think that's our time
to go home when we graduate.
Death is graduation.
>>NOORY: We're occupying
a hotel room right now--
>>VAN PRAAGH: That's right.
>>NOORY: --before
we go home, right?
>>VAN PRAAGH: That's right.
We're sitting in a car.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
Tell us about the
James Van Praagh story.
How did this all happen?
>>VAN PRAAGH: This
all started with me
when I was a little boy.
I used to see
spirits around people
all the time, just like in the
movie the "Sixth Sense" where
I'd see spirits standing there.
>>NOORY: I see dead people.
>>VAN PRAAGH: I see dead people.
And I used to see
them all the time.
And I used to say to
my mother and father,
I see so and so standing
there-- my grandfather.
And this is how he looks.
And is that him?
That's him, but he's dead.
You can't see him.
But, yeah, I could
see him right there.
And in grade school,
I used to have--
gosh, kids come through windows
through the grade school
and talk to me about things.
>>NOORY: Kids-- on?
>>VAN PRAAGH: That
had passed on.
I once in grade school
went to a Catholic school.
And I remember that I
walked up to my teacher,
and she was a nun.
And I said to her, your son
just broke his leg, but it's OK.
He's able to walk,
but he broke his leg.
But he'll be able to walk.
He's OK.
I have to tell you that.
And she said go
back to your seat.
And five minutes later,
the other principal
came in and called
her out of the room.
[LAUGHTER]
She comes back in and she
said, James, come here.
And she says, how did you
know my son broke his leg?
The soccer ball went into
the middle of the street,
and he chased it.
And a car hit him, but he's
OK-- just broke his leg.
And I started crying,
because I thought
I caused that to happen.
Because I had the thought,
I caused it to happen.
>>NOORY: You thought
you manifested it.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Exactly.
And she said, God gives certain
people certain abilities
or whatever she would
say to a six-year-old.
And she said one day maybe
you'll use it to help people.
And really from that point on,
I did see spirit regularly.
I remember I was saying prayers
with my mother every night.
And at one point,
I said to my mom,
who are those people
at the end of the bed
with the lights around them?
And she said, oh,
those are God's angels.
You see them, too.
You can't tell
everybody about that.
Because not everybody
will understand it.
So I did those.
>>NOORY: Your mom was right.
>>VAN PRAAGH: And mom was right.
And that was probably
to the age around 14.
I stopped seeing them.
12, 14-- puberty started,
so something else started.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>VAN PRAAGH: So my mind
was elsewhere, obviously.
And then I went to a seminary--
went to a preparatory
seminary--
>>NOORY: All right.
>>VAN PRAAGH: --at
the age of about 14,
15 to become a priest, because
I was going to become a priest,
>>NOORY: Father van Praagh.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Father Van
Praagh, because I wanted
to serve people in some way.
And I knew I had to do that.
And it was the seminary.
This is very interesting.
I was in a seminary.
And I was doing--
I guess we'd call
it a meditation.
You're by yourself
in the sanctuary.
You're by yourself.
And I heard spirits say to
me, you are much bigger than--
God is much bigger
than these four walls.
You must find God
outside these four walls.
So I quit the seminary-- went to
a New York public high school.
>>NOORY: Just like that?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Just like that.
That was the beginning.
And then I went to become--
I wanted to become a
situation comedy writer,
because I'm funny.
So I thought I would do that.
And I moved to California to
get my degree in broadcasting,
which I did in San Francisco and
then moved down to Los Angeles.
And through a series
of different jobs,
temporary jobs, and
so forth, I met a lady
at the William Morris Agency
in the basement, not--
>>NOORY: Good agency.
>>VAN PRAAGH: --in the mailroom.
In the basement, not
even the mailroom.
And she said, do you
want to see a medium?
And I said, what is a medium?
And she said it's somebody
who talks to dead people.
And I said, I really
don't believe in that,
because I grew up
kind of Catholic.
I don't have a
belief system per se,
but I don't know if
I believe in that.
And I said, I'll go with you
anyway-- just to humor her.
So I went there.
And as soon as I walked
into this man's apartment
in Manhattan Beach,
he looked at me.
And he said, you're a medium.
And I said, oh, thanks.
I thought I was a small,
but thank you very much.
[LAUGHTER]
I appreciate that.
And he said in two years'
time, the spirit people
are going to use you to help
change the consciousness
of the planet.
And I said, I just want
to be a sitcom writer.
I want don't change the
consciousness of the planet.
And he said, no, this
is what your destiny is.
And he went and gave a
reading to me, a session.
And everything he
said made sense
and some really weird
incredible details
of people that passed over.
So it got me thinking.
And I went to-- but
was then called,
as you know, the
Bodhi Tree, which
is a new age bookstore in LA.
And I went every weekend and
read everything I could find--
>>NOORY: Everything you could.
>>VAN PRAAGH: --about
the paranormal,
and life after death,
near-death experiences.
And I started meditating.
And I started meditating just
to be centered, to center myself
and to have a clear
idea about what I
wanted-- a future with my life.
And it was during
that time that I
started seeing colors around
people known as the aura.
>>NOORY: The aura,
like Edgar Cayce.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Like Edgar Casey.
And I started seeing
the aura and I just--
it was just something I knew.
And then years passed.
I was working at Paramount
Studios at the time,
doing contracts
for their TV shows.
And this co-worker
walked into her cubicle.
And besides her, I saw
her dead grandmother.
And the dead grandmother
looked right at me.
And telepathically, she
said I'm her grandmother.
I'm from Idaho.
And we made a
footstool together.
Tell her about the
house and the footstool.
And tell her I love
her and I'm in heaven.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>VAN PRAAGH: And
I asked the girl.
And she said that's
my grandmama.
She lives in Idaho.
I used to visit
her every summer.
She taught me knitting
at the end of her life.
We made a footstool
cover together.
And she made a promise
that she would come through
to me if she could from heaven.
And that was the beginning.
>>NOORY: Remarkable.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Freaked out.
I ran out of Paramount--
ran right out.
I went back to my apartment not
knowing what to do, because--
>>NOORY: Were you scared?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I was scared.
My life was changed.
>>NOORY: Well, did
you forget about what
you did when you were a kid?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Well, I did.
I was in a whole
different mindset.
And I didn't know who to call.
So the only one I could--
because who can you
call and tell this to?
So I called up this
man, Brian Hurst,
who was the medium who
I had seen years before.
And I said, Brian,
I'm freaking out,
because I don't know what
to do with this information.
And he said, James, don't
you remember the prediction
from the spirit world
that in two years' time,
you're going to be changing
the consciousness of the world?
I said, yes, yes.
And he said, James, that
was two years ago today.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>VAN PRAAGH: So that's
how that happened.
>>NOORY: And you did
change the world.
>>VAN PRAAGH: I did.
I quit Paramount.
And I studied under Brian for
many years in development.
And I started doing the work.
And I quit Paramount.
And it's amazing how the
universe will give us tests.
The universe tests
this every day.
And that was a big test, because
it was money, and security,
and so forth.
But it was either that
or what was in my heart--
the love in my heart and
that feeling in my heart.
And I knew that power, that
sense of healing people
was the most powerful
thing that could be.
>>NOORY: And what a
difference it has become--
>>VAN PRAAGH: And what
a difference now--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>NOORY: --that you've made
for people and yourself.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Yes.
Yes.
I could look back at my life.
I just had a major birthday.
And I look back at my life like,
well, I've made a difference.
I have made a difference.
>>NOORY: You have.
>>VAN PRAAGH: And I think
anyone in this world--
a successful life is if
you look back at your life
and you've made a difference.
You've made the
world better than it
was when you first got here.
>>NOORY: Harry Houdini would
have loved to have met you.
>>VAN PRAAGH: I think
we've met before.
>>NOORY: I was
just going to say--
>>VAN PRAAGH: I have a feeling--
>>NOORY: --you might have.
>>VAN PRAAGH:
--we've met before.
It was very interesting
you say that,
because I've always had
a connection with him
in some way.
And I was asked two years
ago to do a consulting
job on "Houdini" the
musical with Hugh Jackman.
And I actually had Stephen
Schwartz, a composer,
write a song based upon
my life that he was
going to put in the musical.
The musical hasn't
been made yet,
because they've had some
creative stuff going on.
So I don't know if will be.
But I literally had Stephen
Schwartz writing a song--
>>NOORY: Oh, that would be cool.
>>VAN PRAAGH: --for
me based upon my life.
And that was one of
those pinch-me moments.
Wow.
So--
>>NOORY: That would be cool.
>>VAN PRAAGH: --a
lot of strange things
have happened
because of the work.
>>NOORY: You have
a school called
the School of Mystical Arts.
>>VAN PRAAGH: That's right-- the
JVP School of Mystical Arts--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>NOORY: Let's take a look
at some of your work there.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Grounding is
really, really important.
Because you have
to start beginning
to have the perspective that
you're going to see things
energetically about yourself.
You're going to
start sensing energy.
And one of those
important things
is to feel very, very grounded.
Because when you're fully
grounded within your being,
and you're centered, and you're
then you're able to be open much
more to the healing energies,
to other people's energy and
not let that affect you so much.
So your in control of
the space around you.
You're in control.
So here's one for grounding.
I just want you again to--
you can sit down for this.
I find it better sitting
down instead of standing.
You can do it standing, but
for this particular grounding
exercise, I would
just be sitting here.
And I'm going to use
the breath again.
And the breath--
I'm just going to use the
breath by a cleansing breath
in and out.
And when you say
cleansing breath,
that can be a sense of waterfall
coming over you and through you
and exhale.
And energy that doesn't
serve you, that's great.
Now, as the grounding,
I'm just going
to use my imagination again.
And I'm going to envision
that I am a tree.
And I just want you
to envision a tree.
And as you inhale, I want you
to go to the base of that tree
and imagine that you're
the trunk of that tree.
And the roots of the tree go
all the way down to Mother Earth
and holds you down
to Mother Earth.
She's connected with you.
You are connected with her.
So the more you inhale,
you're going to become aware
of these roots--
are all the way down,
all the arteries
going down into the ground
and feeling that connection.
So I'm going to
imagine I'm a tree--
your trunk.
Exhale.
Just imagining a tree
connecting all the way down.
All the way down.
And also, your energy
goes out of your feet,
all the way down
to Mother Earth.
You can see it that way, that
you are completely grounded
and held together, structured.
>>NOORY: I love that.
>>VAN PRAAGH: There's
so much more to it.
That's just-- that clip
is just one of so many.
My gosh.
It's important to be grounded.
I mean, any type of work we do--
no matter what type of work
we do, we got be grounded.
We got to be.
I find most people,
George, are in their heads.
They're always thinking,
thinking, thinking,
thinking, because we've
been programmed that way.
But if we get into
what I call the heart--
from the head to the heart--
the heart is where the soul is.
And that's our true essence.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>VAN PRAAGH: And if we can
make our choices in life
from our soul point of view, the
easier those choices will be.
And the more accurate
they'll be for us.
>>NOORY: What I have
noticed about you,
James, is that you
actually care about people.
>>VAN PRAAGH: I think
you're so funny.
>>NOORY: You know what?
[LAUGHTER]
And it shows.
>>VAN PRAAGH: You're great.
I do.
Thank you for saying that,
because it's a compliment.
And not many people
have said that,
but I was once working at a
school with other teachers,
other mediums.
And I was working with
this couple of students.
And I was working with them.
And another medium
came by to me.
And he whispered in my ear.
And he said, you really care.
I thought, well,
of course, I do.
>>NOORY: Hello?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Hello?
Why are we doing this?
I do.
I really care.
Because it takes
a lot for someone
to open themselves up to be
vulnerable, self-discovery.
It could be scary
for some people,
because you don't know
what you're going to get.
So there's a lot of that
fear stuff going on.
So you really got to
help them that way.
And if you can demonstrate
to them that you really
care for them, that you're
really involved with them,
then they'll trust you
and open up for you.
>>NOORY: I want to give our
viewers just a little example
of this caring about you.
Because James was on the
radio show "Coast to Coast AM"
several years ago.
And during that
interview on the radio,
he invited me to one
of his live events
that he was having in
Los Angeles at the time
with the individual that he
had brought in from London.
And so I went to the event.
And he introduced
me to the crowd.
And then he started
doing his thing.
And what I noticed about people
that really got close to you--
they started crying.
It was emotional for them.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Yeah,
many people do.
Many people do.
They feel the love.
I mean, I can't say it's all me.
But I'm just a vessel.
But the vessel is
unconditional love,
and that's what love is about.
Love never dies.
So our loved ones are
around us all the time.
And that love that
they have for us--
they love us for
just who we are.
There are no conditions.
So I think people feel that.
As you get close to the
energy of the vessel,
someone who described it,
is they feel that love.
And that's what it's about.
It's about love.
>>NOORY: Has it ever
been a burden for you?
I mean, have you
had a spirit come
through when you're sleeping?
James, James, I've
got to tell you this.
And you just can't--
>>VAN PRAAGH: No.
>>NOORY: --sleep?
>>VAN PRAAGH: The only
burdens I've had are--
I'm more afraid of the
living than I am of the dead,
to tell you the truth.
The living have been a
little hard to deal with.
Because the living don't know.
They're ignorant about
the subject matter.
And unfortunately, if they knew
more about the subject matter--
and listen.
I'm not like a regular
celebrity or a rock star.
I am-- something
special going on.
>>NOORY: You're close.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Exactly.
>>VAN PRAAGH: So when
I go on a plane--
at my last plane ride I had, the
flight attendant recognized me.
And introduced himself,
which was very nice.
And the other flight
attendant-- thank you very much.
And then they both came back.
And they said, the captain
knows who you are, too.
And we'd like to invite
you to dinner afterwards--
>>NOORY: Oh, that's cool.
>>VAN PRAAGH: --when
we land in San Diego.
And I'm like, thank you.
I appreciate it, but I
really can't do that.
>>NOORY: I'd feel safe on a
plane with you, by the way.
If I'm going to be
on a plane, I want
to be on with Van
Praagh, a medium.
>>VAN PRAAGH: I've had a lot
of people say that to me.
Oh, you're on this plane.
Good, I'm safe.
[LAUGHTER]
And I'll know.
I go on a plane and I
know when it's sick.
I call it sick.
And I said to my friend Lynn
Probert from England, also.
We were meeting at JFK.
And it was during the
summer two years ago.
And we got on a flight.
And it was going to California.
And I walked in.
I said it's a sick plane.
She goes, what do you
mean a sick plane?
I said it's not going
to be taking off.
Well, to make a
long story short,
six hours later,
it never took off.
>>NOORY: Oh, my God.
>>VAN PRAAGH: We had to sleep
in a hotel and go the next day.
>>NOORY: Which is
probably a good thing.
>>VAN PRAAGH: It's a good
thing, because it ended up
in Minneapolis, so there you go.
>>NOORY: You were a consultant
on "Ghost Whisperer."
>>VAN PRAAGH: I actually
created this show.
>>NOORY: You developed it?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I created
this show "Ghost Whisperer"
based upon--
I did a movie for CBS
called "Talking to Heaven"
based on my first book.
>>NOORY: All right.
>>VAN PRAAGH: And
Ted Danson played me,
because we look so
much alike, of course.
And the movie did very,
very well for CBS.
That was when they
did a mini series.
And then they made another
movie with Eva Longoria.
And that did well.
And then Nina Tassler,
the head of the network,
said, can you make a series up?
Can you come up with
some kind of a series?
And that time, I knew Mary Ann
Winkowski, who we both know,
who was from my
TV show, "Beyond."
And I thought about, what about
a show about spirits that get
caught up and they don't
move onto the light?
And really, that's how
"Ghost Whisperer" began.
So I literally interviewed
the head writer
on the show and the producers.
And I brought the staff
together, team together.
And we did the show.
And it's lasted five years.
It lasted.
It's still in syndication,
still seen throughout the world.
>>NOORY: That's great.
Would you consider yourself,
in addition to a medium, James,
a psychic or intuitive?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I think
every medium is a psychic,
but not every
psychic is a medium.
So every single person is able
to psychically, if you will,
connect or be instinctive
about other people's energy.
When you meet somebody, you
feel a certain way about them.
Or you go to a certain
place, and you feel
a certain way about the place.
Because I think as we're
born as children-- as babies,
there's a natural
connection with our mothers.
There's an instinctual
connection--
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>VAN PRAAGH:
--with their mother,
so everybody is psychic,
which can be developed.
Mediumship-- every medium
is very, very psychic--
have to be.
But then mediumship
is not only psychic,
but you have to open
up yourself to a higher
vibration of energy, I
guess you'd call it--
your soul self.
And I believe that
the soul is the mind.
The mind is the soul.
And you have to raise your
frequency to that level
and sustain that level
of power-- we call power.
And then be able to be the
interface between the spirit
messages.
And the spirits come through.
It's mind to mind communication.
Because the soul is the mind.
So from their mind, they're
sending impressions, thoughts,
feelings, memories, emotions.
And the mind of the medium has
to then translate that and give
it out to the public.
So that's the difference
between the two.
So not every psychic is a
medium, but every is a psychic.
>>NOORY: When you
would see dead people
when you were a youngster,
did you think they were dead?
Or did they look alive to you?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I didn't
know what dead was.
I didn't know there was death.
>>NOORY: OK, you
would see them, right?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Yeah.
>>NOORY: I mean, you could have
put your hand through them,
right?
They weren't there.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Yeah.
For a little kid who's really--
children are always learning,
but based upon their
experiences around them
as-- that's how they
measure their life.
And for me, they were just
very real beings with colors.
And every living person--
I'd see auras around them,
so I though everybody
could see those things.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>VAN PRAAGH: And I remember
playing with my neighborhood
playmates.
And I said, do you see
that guy over there?
No.
And it was very confusing.
How come I can see them?
They can't see them.
>>NOORY: Where did
you get the gift--
the mediumship?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I think that a
mediumship runs in families.
I think it's hereditary.
>>NOORY: It's got to be genetic.
>>VAN PRAAGH: It's genetic.
My grandfather on
my mother's side--
he used to say to
my grandmother,
you better set up another
place on the table,
because there's going to
be someone here at 5:15.
And sure enough, the
neighbor would show at 5:15.
Or my mother-- my grandmother
on my father's side
just to read my tea leaves.
So it runs in families.
It tends to run in families.
>>NOORY: Can you train
someone to be a medium?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Yes, that's
what I do in my school online.
I have a JVP School
of Mystical Arts.
I have a certification course
for mediumship 1, 2, and 3.
And they go through the
basic grounding works,
fundamentals of mediumship.
It's actually, I think, if
I could say it personally,
one of the best online
schools of mediumship
and psychic development
that exists.
And I go through.
I'm very, very intensely
involved in it.
There are over 60
videos per course.
>>NOORY: Oh, it's huge.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Huge.
And I do Zoom calls
with everybody.
And the third
mediumship level-- you
have to audition--
actual audition with me.
And you get to work with me
out on stage and go with me,
so I cover everything
in that school.
So I cover transformation.
I have 28th day
of transformation,
a day in the spirit
world, how to meditate,
how to ground yourself.
>>NOORY: Isn't technology
amazing, James?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Amazing.
I never thought that I
would be able to do this,
but this is my legacy of--
>>NOORY: Well, look how much
travel time it has probably
saved you--
>>VAN PRAAGH: Quite a bit.
>>NOORY: --when you
can do everything
on either YouTube, or on your
website, or direct to people
and stream it them.
>>VAN PRAAGH: It's quite a bit.
Quite a bit.
Now, I used to
have a show called
"Beyond," which we're going
to start streaming now
on the internet.
>>NOORY: Good for you.
>>VAN PRAAGH: So that's good.
So that's another way
of teaching people.
>>NOORY: Have you ever
been scared as a medium?
Is there anything that has
happened that scared even you?
>>VAN PRAAGH: One thing
happened in the very beginning
of my career, I
guess you would say.
My career is spanning
close to 40 years.
I'm old, George.
So--
>>NOORY: What did you do?
Start when you were two?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I guess
I was in my 20s.
And I was called into a
house in Beverly Hills.
And what it was, was--
it was a lady who was
trying to build this house.
And she couldn't build it.
And all these contractors quit,
because they would do something
in the pipes.
And then the next day the
water would be running down.
The pipes would be broken.
Lighting would happen.
Someone would come and fix that.
That'd be broken.
They never did fix the house.
So I went there.
And that comes a little scary.
But I tuned into it
and figured it out.
And what it was-- now,
this is really weird.
I said there was a man that
lived two doors down who
was a doctor.
And she goes, there was?
And so we found out
that that doctor was
involved with organized crime.
>>NOORY: Oh, boy.
>>VAN PRAAGH: And
that some people
were killed at that house.
And that guy that was
killed at that house--
and there were one
or two people--
they were kind of stuck
where they wanted people
to know about how they died.
And that was one scary thing--
>>NOORY: That is kind of scary.
>>VAN PRAAGH: --to happen.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
I thought you were going to say
it was Bugsy Siegel's house.
[LAUGHTER]
>>VAN PRAAGH: No.
Although, I've been
around there, so yeah.
>>NOORY: That's right.
You've got a program
on Gaia that they have.
It's called "Spirit Talk."
>>VAN PRAAGH: "Spirit Talk."
>>NOORY: An amazing show.
Let's look at some of that.
>>VAN PRAAGH: And
I just want you
to close-- put your arms down.
You're right here with me now.
Take a deep breath.
Get back into your heart space.
Great.
Fabulous.
And now, so you've been
opened up beautifully
by these beings
that are around you.
And I just want you
to feel whatever
you feel-- a male or a female.
Or what do you feel
with your heart?
Because you're such
an emotional person.
>> Definitely a
male coming through.
>>VAN PRAAGH: A
So a male coming through.
OK.
And what does that
male feel like?
>> He feels older.
>>VAN PRAAGH: He feels
like an older male
and older meaning what, 60, 70?
>> No, 80s.
>>VAN PRAAGH: 80s?
So an older male--
80s.
Very good.
What does he feel like?
Great.
>> He feels kind of
stocky, but not very tall.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Stocky,
but not very tall.
OK, good.
>> Broad shouldered.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Broad shouldered?
Great.
What's his personality like?
>> He comes across as kind of
harsh, but he's really not.
>>VAN PRAAGH: So he's
harsh, but inside he's
soft with the exterior
of being hard.
Yeah, OK.
And give him a voice now.
Now, you want to give
this man a voice.
>> His voice is very gruff.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Very gruff?
Very gruff.
OK.
>> Long upper body, short legs.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Long
upper body, short legs.
Very good.
And did he pass away
inside or outside?
>> Inside.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Inside?
And was he on a bed or
was he sitting down?
>> I think this
man was in a bed.
>>VAN PRAAGH: He was in a bed.
OK, so great.
So just go repeat what
you get to yourself.
I have a man here.
And just repeat it, honey.
A man here.
>> I have a man here
who is in a bed.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Bed.
Yeah.
And he's older.
>> He's definitely older in
his 80s, probably mid-80s.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Mid-80s.
Very good.
He feels very gruff.
>> Very gruff, even at
the end, but wasn't.
He probably came across
as very ungrateful,
but he's very grateful.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Very grateful.
And he obviously loves
somebody here in this audience.
OK.
And you get a feel where
this man wants to go toward--
that side of the
room or that side?
>> I think I'm over here.
>>VAN PRAAGH: You want to go
over this side of the room.
OK, good.
So we're drawing the energy
to the left side of the room.
Great.
If you want to turn and face--
see that side of the room--
great.
And do you feel anything around
here where want to go to?
>> I'm here somewhere.
>>VAN PRAAGH: You're right here.
So the information
that was said so far--
does either one of
you understand that?
No.
Anybody on this side
understand that?
She understands that.
OK.
>> I can see his face.
>>VAN PRAAGH: You
can see his face.
Good.
Describe it.
Perfect.
>> To me, his face
is more square.
I see age spots along here.
Gray hair, but olive-toned skin.
>> I think that's
our grandfather.
>>VAN PRAAGH: That's grandpa.
>> It could be.
>>NOORY: How cool is that?
>>VAN PRAAGH:
That's pretty cool.
My hair was darker, too.
[LAUGHTER]
That's pretty cool.
That's a great way I work
with students, anyone,
and how they begin
to feel the spirit
and how they build
up that contact.
And that goes on
further and further.
And a really great message
comes through with that.
>>NOORY: It sure does.
And people can watch
"Spirit Talk" on gaia.com.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Gaia.com.
Watch all the episodes.
They're right there.
>>NOORY: That's great.
You could tell the
empathy of people,
too, when they hear you
talking to somebody like that.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Yes.
Yes.
>>NOORY: You just
draw it out of them.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Yes,
because it's love work.
It's heart work.
And the reason the
spirit people come in
is because they
love that person.
And the reason someone--
they hear about someone
is because they love them.
So love, like life, never dies.
So you're working
with love, and that's
what has to be demonstrated.
>>NOORY: Have you ever
had a spirit, James,
go, tell her the money is
under the mattress or something
strange like that?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I have.
>>NOORY: Really?
[LAUGHTER]
>>VAN PRAAGH: I have.
I rarely would do
that sort of thing.
But it was kind of a joke,
but it ended up being real.
>>NOORY: But it was real.
Yeah.
>>VAN PRAAGH: I was at Belmont
Park years ago with my brother.
>>NOORY: The horse race?
>>VAN PRAAGH: The horse race.
Yeah, on Long Island.
And there was a family reunion.
And my brother said,
listen, here's a race.
We have all these horses here.
Which one would you go
first, second, third, fourth?
I said, Michael, I don't
do that sort of thing.
And I said, but if I would,
I'd go 1, 2, 3, and 4.
And he didn't listen to me, and
they all came in the same way.
>>NOORY: No.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Yeah.
Yeah, that happened.
>>NOORY: The--
>>VAN PRAAGH: I also had
spirit come through once.
This is very interesting.
A lady by the name of
Magda up in Topanga Canyon
in California.
Her husband had died.
Her husband actually had the
patent for Samsonite luggage.
So there you go.
>>NOORY: Aha.
>>VAN PRAAGH: And she was
a good client of mine.
I went to her house
one Sunday afternoon.
And she said, James,
I've lost a paper.
I need a file.
Where's my paper?
I got to get this paper.
It's very important.
Can you tell my husband--
or ask my husband where
this paper would be?
And I concentrated.
And it came through.
And he actually brought me
downstairs to the basement.
And he said it's in the
third filing cabinet--
this--
>>NOORY: Right here.
>>VAN PRAAGH: --third
cabinet, second door down.
And she found it.
>>NOORY: There it was.
>>VAN PRAAGH: There it was.
>>NOORY: Remarkable.
What do you think of
souls at this point?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Souls?
I think that we're all souls.
Many people ask me this.
It's very interesting.
Because we are in
a human level here.
So our comprehension
of a soul is
from the human point of view.
I think that the analogy
I like to use as a soul is
like the bright big round sun.
I think our souls are
a big round sun, right?
I think this is one part
of your soul, right?
So this body is one
part of the soul.
I think that 20% of your
soul is inside the body.
80% is outside of the body.
And I think that that 80% could
be living different lifetimes,
experiencing different
things, all at the same time
that this 20% in the human--
>>NOORY: It's a good analogy.
>>VAN PRAAGH: --is
experiencing it.
>>NOORY: Reincarnation?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Reincarnation
for sure, without a doubt.
I think that we can be
reincarnated all the time.
I think that what we do now
in the human-- our actions,
our thoughts, our deeds affect
the past and the future.
>>NOORY: Is there a hell, James?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I think
we create our hell based
upon how we live our lives, and
the thoughts that we give out,
and the words that we use.
So for instance, I can tell
you that in my experience,
a man came through once,
and he was in hell.
And I say that he never told
his daughter he loved her.
And all he wished was he
could tell her he loved her.
>>NOORY: Oh, my God.
>>VAN PRAAGH: And because he
never told her he loved her,
she never believed in herself.
She never trusted herself.
She never got into
great relationships.
She never lived with people.
She lived with cats.
That was it.
And he lived in
the spirit world.
And he was living in hell,
because the spirit world
is really a world of the mind.
It's a mental world.
We live in a physical world.
The spirit world
is a mental world.
So we live with all of the
thoughts we've ever created.
And his thought was I wish
I could have loved her more.
Why can't I have loved her more?
And that went on
for quite a while,
because there's no time
in the spirit world.
>>NOORY: And he was
beating himself up.
>>VAN PRAAGH:
Beating himself up.
And we tend to
beat ourselves up.
I mean, you can imagine
here on this Earth.
We do something.
We feel, well, I
shouldn't have done that.
I shouldn't have said that.
Imagine when you're in a world
where it's just mental thought
over, and over, and over again.
So that can be our hell, based
on how we lived our life.
So luckily enough, a guy
came to him and said to him
there is a medium
who can help you.
And again to make
a long story short,
that man actually came
through me at a reading
and was able to tell his
daughter he truly loved her,
so that was healed.
So he was healed.
She was healed.
>>NOORY: She was healed.
>>VAN PRAAGH: He
was able to move on.
>>NOORY: Did she get emotional?
I bet she did.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Very emotional.
Oh, very, very-- and
her whole life changed.
Her whole life changed.
>>NOORY: That's all
she wanted to hear.
>>VAN PRAAGH: That's
all she needed.
And then she could
live her life fully.
So we get caught
up in those things.
But we've got to be very, very
careful and very responsible
about what comes out of our
mouths, out of our heads,
and our actions that we make.
And people often
said tell your people
when you do your lectures
that their thoughts, words,
and deeds do count.
And they will meet them.
As soon as they pass over
here, they'll meet everything
they did-- good,
bad, or indifferent.
>>NOORY: How many spirits are
longing to communicate with us?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Wow.
I can't give you
a limited number,
because I think it's infinite.
Many, many, many,
many who realize
that they still love you.
They want you to
know they're OK.
Most of them want you
to know they're OK.
They're still alive.
And they're still part
of your everyday life.
They start to influence
your everyday life.
This is something
very interesting.
Babies that pass over-- young
children that pass over--
to me, it's one of
the hardest lessons
a soul has to go through.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>VAN PRAAGH: This
is our soul school.
And that's one of
the hardest lessons
that the souls sign up for
before they come back down.
But I find that in many
cases, those souls of children
really pass over to
help the living person--
their parent to follow--
>>NOORY: To grieve.
>>VAN PRAAGH: --through
on their destiny.
Yeah.
>>NOORY: And it's got
to be rough for a parent
to lose a child.
>>VAN PRAAGH: I think it's
the hardest lesson there is.
I really do.
I just did a
reading in New York,
and a gentleman's
son came through.
He did not believe
in any of this.
His wife dragged him
to one of my lecturers.
And the son came through
and told the daddy
he really loved the teddy
bear that he was given
when he was three years old.
And it still has
a hole in its arm.
And the man was then a believer.
And he was just in awe.
And he said, we'll
use that information.
Because your son just helped
open you up spiritually
for your whole life.
>>NOORY: Do you find
that a parent who
has lost a young person loses
faith in believing in God?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Sometimes.
Sometimes for sure.
Sometimes.
Not everybody, but sometimes.
Because they feel like God
is-- what has God done to them?
>>NOORY: Abandoned them
or something, right?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Yeah.
How could God do this?
But, George, I think
that's changing.
I think generally speaking, the
consciousness of this planet
is changing.
Because shows like yours, and
your radio show for years,
and movies, and
books, and work I've
done-- it's changing people's
outlook-- their mind.
And I don't think
death is as frightening
as it used to be to people.
I think people are
understanding it more.
They realize it's
the transition,
and it's not as scary.
It really isn't.
No one should be
scared to death.
There's no pain in death.
There might be pain
leading up to death.
But then there's
some great drugs
for that, which the wonderful
spirit world has inspired
scientists to create
these drugs and medicines,
so there wouldn't be pain.
There should never be pain.
And no one ever dies alone.
There's a reunion.
People look forward
to coming home.
That's something
people should know.
>>NOORY: Do your departed
family members really show up?
>>VAN PRAAGH: They do show up.
They show up months
ahead, weeks ahead.
And they look forward
to your arrival.
And usually, you will end
up at-- when you pass over,
they'll be at your
mother's house.
And they say mother's house.
And it looks exactly like it
did on Earth, because you're
familiar with it.
There's a sense of
familiarity, and that
helps with your transition.
And then you have a little
bit of a rest period.
But there's like a life review.
You see your whole life.
And then you begin to--
everybody goes back to
their memorial service as--
I know Mary Ann has
told you that as well.
People go back to their
memorial services and they see--
it's so funny.
The men always count how many
cars are in the procession.
The women are interested
in the flowers.
And my father-- this
is a funny story.
My father in his funeral--
he was laid out.
And I'm standing there talking.
And he came behind me.
And he said, thanks for
putting my teeth in.
I look pretty good.
>>NOORY: I love it.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Because
he had false teeth,
so that was pretty good.
But they always go there.
And there is no pain.
So people should know that.
>>NOORY: What's the difference
between people who were
really sensitive and empaths?
Is there?
>>VAN PRAAGH: The same thing.
>>NOORY: It is?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I
call them empaths.
In my school, I have a
whole class on empaths.
I have tools for the
highly sensitive.
And it's really for empaths.
Those people that are
very, very open sensitive.
Their sensitivity is very open.
And the clip you saw
earlier about grounding--
I made that specifically
for empathic people
who are very sensitive.
And they really have to know how
to strongly be within the body
and also deal their sensitivity.
We can't be so spiritually
evolved and so sensitive
that we're no earthly good.
We know we're here for a reason.
And we've got to use
that sensitivity in a way
to expand and help ourselves
and those around us
and teach those around us.
That's really what it's about.
We're not victims.
We are sensitive because we
might teach other people,
and learn from
it, and teach them
how to be sensitive
in the right way.
>>NOORY: Well, the
film "Sensitive"
shows a little bit about what's
being done with research.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Yes.
>> Brain imaging conducted by
Jadzia Jagiellowicz during her
doctoral studies at Stony
Brook University and published
in social cognitive and
affective neuroscience show
that the areas of the brain for
understanding subtle cues are
more active in sensitive
than non-sensitive persons.
>> What this study means is that
highly sensitive people notice
more about the
world they live in.
But the key thing is not
just that they notice more.
They take what they
notice and they combine it
with information that they've
noticed all their life.
So because they've noticed
more all their life
and because they're able to
combine all that information,
they often come up
with unique new ideas.
>> Combining ideas in novel ways
is the essence of creativity.
Even experiences while young,
such as with different animals,
may lead later to
creative insights
about all animals and
their temperaments.
Or combining novel
ideas might bring
about new research
breakthroughs,
revolutionary art, or
world-changing insights.
We are not saying that
all creative people
are highly sensitive.
But surely the qualities we
see in them do contribute
substantially to creativity.
Another striking
finding was that there
was more activity for
sensitive people in the insula,
part of the brain often called
the seat of consciousness.
Because it brings together
all of our inner and outer
experiences.
>> Highly sensitive
individuals--
they're engaging the
insula to a greater extent.
Because in some ways, it's
like they're more aware.
And this is in line with a
lot of the other research
and the theory on sensory
processing sensitivity,
suggesting that highly
sensitive people are more aware
of others.
They're more aware
of the subtleties
in their environment.
>>NOORY: Do you agree
with that, James?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I do.
And I think the insula--
it's very interesting.
Because with the insula--
to me, it can be reached and
is reached through meditation.
And through meditation, through
quieting down, going within,
you become more aware and
more pure of who you are.
And the more you
are sitting in--
I call it the stillness
of your being--
you're getting more of that
insula, the creative self,
the sensitive self,
the soul self.
The soul is very sensitive.
And I think that's a very,
very good film in that--
pointing out that different
experiences in our life
will build up to
other experiences.
And we measure things
based upon those
and become very aware
of everything going on.
I think it's really
important for most people
to be what we call mindful,
being in the moment.
>>NOORY: Correct.
>>VAN PRAAGH: And when
we live in the moment,
we're also very aware of
everything going on around us.
And I think, otherwise,
we're not being part of life.
We're just living through
life, not acting in life.
>>NOORY: You find
highly sensitive people
are happier people?
>>VAN PRAAGH: To a point.
>>NOORY: To a point?
>>VAN PRAAGH: It depends on
what their backgrounds are.
>>NOORY: All right.
>>VAN PRAAGH: So if they're in a
family dynamic which they don't
support, encourage sensitivity,
it's very, very difficult
than to be with a
family who does indeed
understand sensitivity.
>>NOORY: And you can
get more sensitive?
>>VAN PRAAGH: You can become
more sensitive, much more aware
and much more sensitive
through meditation work,
through mindfulness work.
I find through working
with animals as well.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I
find one exercise
to do for sensitivities, I put
a blindfold around somebody.
And I have them walk around
the room and feel things.
And I have them, what
do you feel about--
I give them a sentence.
What do you feel
about that sentence?
Tell me everything you can about
that sentence from the color
of the sentence, the
color of the words,
the shape of the words.
What do you feel about
it in your heart?
And it's an amazing experience.
Yeah.
>>NOORY: That's pretty dramatic.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Yeah,
it's pretty incredible.
>>NOORY: Let's talk for a
moment, James, about evil.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Evil?
>>NOORY: You're a good guy.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Evil.
>>NOORY: I can tell you've
got a heart of gold.
But there's evil out there.
>>VAN PRAAGH: I know.
Let's talk about evil.
>>NOORY: There are evil people.
>>VAN PRAAGH: I lived--
I worked in Hollywood
for a long time, so yes.
>>NOORY: You know
what it's like.
You've seen that.
Why is there so much
evil on this planet?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I think,
George, honestly speaking,
I don't necessarily
believe in evil I think
evil is a man-made concept.
I really do.
>>NOORY: It may be.
>>VAN PRAAGH: I think it is.
I think it's a man-made concept.
I think there's just love.
And I think there are
degrees of love or not love.
So I think it's more like that.
Some would say evil.
When we bring up
the word evil, it
conjures up demons, and devils,
and these sorts of things,
and the exorcism.
I don't believe in that.
I think everything is of love.
I think that there
are degrees of that.
And I think what we call evil.
>>NOORY: But there
are bad people.
>>VAN PRAAGH: There
There are people who
don't know themselves.
There are people
don't love themselves
or no sense of themselves.
And they want to--
they want love.
And part of being-- if you
call it evil, if they're
angry individuals,
they did bad things,
I think it's just a
cry-out, because they
want love for themselves.
I really do.
I think there are people
who have no conscience.
I think there are
people that have
maybe something going on in
their heads that isn't correct.
Because they're bipolar or
whatever want to call it,
that something is going
mentally with them as well.
Because we come
back to develop our
emotional, spiritual,
mental, and physical selves
on this Earth.
And there's some beings that
mentally they're not evolved.
So I think that
that's part of it.
I don't believe in evil per se.
But I think it's a
man-made concepts.
But I do think there--
an absence of love.
>>NOORY: Who generally
is more sensitive?
A male or a female?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Female.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Why is that?
>>VAN PRAAGH: The
make-up of the female
of the right side of the brain.
And she has to be because
of having children, right?
>>NOORY: Mm-hmm.
>>VAN PRAAGH: The sensitivity
to be involved with the child.
That's a natural
make-up of the female.
So I think that the
right side of the brain
is the creative side,
is the sensitive side.
And it is much more
predominant the female.
So I think that that's
their natural state
of being is its sensitivity.
>>NOORY: Do you
see this changing
in the next few years, this
entire field that you're in?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Without a doubt.
In the past 30 years--
I've done this 30-plus.
I've lost count after 30.
I used to have just
women come to my events.
Now, I have-- I would
say half man, half women.
>>NOORY: Yeah, that's huge.
>>VAN PRAAGH: And not men
that were dragged there
by their wives either.
Men on their own.
>>NOORY: They're into this.
>>VAN PRAAGH: So they're
really into this.
And I think it's great that men
realize that they're sensitive,
too, and that you can balance
the left and the right side
of the brains.
You can do that.
And I think the more
we realize that,
it's OK to be sensitive and
analytical at the same time.
Great.
Because my favorite
people to work
with as students are those
chemists, those scientists,
medical people, who
I've worked with who
get the grounding of
the analytical, but yet,
they can finally use
their creativity.
And they make the best,
because the balance is there.
>>NOORY: Well, I've
noticed on the radio show
when we take phone
calls that it used
to be primarily male or female,
depending on the subject
matter.
If we were talking
about world events,
all the guys would call.
If we were talking about
the psychic readings,
most of the women would call.
Now, that's balanced
about 50/50 as well.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Now,
it's balanced.
Yes, exactly right.
>>NOORY: On both ends.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Same with me.
So it's also
readership has changed.
More male than female.
It's about the same now.
So it's all different.
It's changing.
The consciousness has shifted.
And I'm glad to see that.
And if you have to consider it--
35 years.
That's not a long time for
the consciousness to shift.
So do we believe
in waves of beings
that have come through
this generation
or the past generations
who are light workers who
have come to change the
consciousness of the planet?
Yes, I do believe that.
I do believe we are
light workers who
brought in this new awareness,
if you will, for people.
I do believe that.
>>NOORY: With what you
bring up-- light workers--
that seems to be growing, too.
>>VAN PRAAGH: And I
do believe in UFOs.
And I do believe in aliens.
I do believe all of that--
>>NOORY: Similarly.
>>VAN PRAAGH: --that we
discussed on "Coast to Coast,"
because I've been through that.
I've seen them.
I've been on their ships.
I've done that.
So there's more to
life than just this.
This is a very small part of us.
As I said earlier about the
soul, 20% the soul within,
80% out.
I call this the big
toe to the soul.
And when I was
sitting in development
as a medium in what's called
the development circle, where
you sit every week and you work
with the power of the energy
to develop your sensitivity,
I would see many beings
who are not humanoids.
We call them alienists.
And they're very much so.
I brought a group of
people to Sedona, Arizona,
and to see UFOs.
And that was years ago.
And it was Saturday
night in Boynton Canyon.
>>NOORY: Clear sky.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Clear sky.
>>NOORY: Perfect.
Yeah.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Stars perfect.
I said, OK, let's see you.
And nothing happened.
And then I heard a voice say
to me, you need to meditate.
In other words,
raise your vibration.
Raise your frequency.
>>NOORY: Maybe telepathy.
You never know.
>>VAN PRAAGH: And
bringing yourself
higher to a higher
level, because they're
on a higher level.
So I told everybody,
we have to meditate.
We meditated, said prayer work.
And suddenly, we all started
seeing these beautiful objects,
colorful objects all over.
TV antennas would
be the closest thing
I could say they looked like--
greens and yellows.
>>NOORY: But they were up way
too high to be TV antennas.
>>VAN PRAAGH: But they
were all over the place.
And a man said to
me, they're here.
I said I know.
And he said, can you get
communication from them?
And I said, well, let me try.
So I walked out to this field.
And I opened myself
up psychically.
up to a point
where I was very, very
aware that these beings were
on a very high level.
And they had to slow themselves
down and bring themselves down
to such a point.
It was like putting a
777 ahead of a needle.
That's how much they had
to knock themselves down.
And all they said
to me was, we do not
understand you human beings.
You have the energy of
love all around you,
yet you don't use it.
Why is that?
And that's all they said.
>>NOORY: A great question.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Yeah.
And that's all they said.
>>NOORY: Which I could ask you.
Why don't we use it?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Because fear.
Because I think that life
is a series of choices.
And a choice is based
upon two things--
love or fear.
And I think when we're
first born, we come in love.
And we're pure
because we've just
come from the spirit realm.
And we're very, very aware.
But then we become programmed
by four or five by the adults,
by teachers.
You have to do this in order to
get an A. You have to do this
in order to receive love.
So there's fear then introduced.
And we have to behave a certain
way to be people pleasers.
And we forget about our true
selves, our true hearts.
And we try to please
people and probably
tell about our mid-life time.
We look back and say,
I'm not truly happy.
I wonder why.
Well, it's because we're living
other people's lives instead
of our own lives, just
to receive their love.
And nobody can love us more
than we could love ourselves.
And what other people think
of us is none of our business.
>>NOORY: I always thought
if I were a teacher,
my first opening
line to the class
would be, you are
all starting with As.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Yes.
>>NOORY: All of you.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Perfect.
>>NOORY: It's yours
to lose, but you all
have gotten an A in this class.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Perfect.
>>NOORY: Now, let's
see what you can do.
>>VAN PRAAGH: That's perfect.
>>NOORY: How about
that for motivation?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I
think that's perfect.
I think you should do that.
Yes, that you should do that.
In my classes, I
start with lectures.
And I say no one
can get it wrong.
There are no wrong answers.
So everything you get is right.
It's your interpretation.
So there is no wrong or right.
So that's right for you.
And they're like, wow, I'm
finally given the chance
to be who I am.
>>NOORY: If you
weren't a medium,
what would you be doing today?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Well, that's
a very interesting question.
And that's changed
over the years.
I'd be a landscape architect.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Yeah,
because I love the garden.
I love flowers.
I love the garden.
I love nature.
>>NOORY: A hobby?
>>VAN PRAAGH: A hobby.
I've actually started
doing it professionally.
And I actually will--
this is very interesting.
I'll meet with a client.
And I look at their auric
feel, the different colors.
And I will design the garden
according to the colors
that they need in their aura.
So when they go out--
>>NOORY: I like that.
>>VAN PRAAGH: --and meditate--
>>NOORY: That's interesting.
>>VAN PRAAGH: --each day in
the garden, they can see it.
And I started doing that.
I had one client.
And then it hit
me on the way home
that I don't need
some lady at 1 o'clock
in the morning calling
me up and saying,
I want more white
instead of red.
So I decided, no, forget that.
So in my own house, I've
created several gardens.
I have meditation gardens,
succulent gardens,
vegetable gardens, rose
gardens, flower garden, just
for my own enhancement.
And I love that.
I love working
with the elements.
I just love it.
And one thing, George, I
do every single day, which
everybody should do, is
I wake up with gratitude.
And every step I
take is gratitude.
I thank the universe.
>>NOORY: Just waking
up is gratitude.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Just
waking up is gratitude.
Thank you for another day
of experiences for my soul.
And everybody that comes in
our path every single day is--
whether you're at
Starbucks, whether you're
at at gas station is there a
teacher or a student of yours.
So we always have
to remember that.
>>NOORY: Good point.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Every
single person.
A teacher or a student.
And treat them accordingly.
Treat them with respect.
>>NOORY: Tell me
about spirit guides.
>>VAN PRAAGH: In
my school online,
I have a whole class
on spirit guides.
There are different
types of guides.
We all have guides.
Every single one of us.
So there are different
types of guides.
And there are some guys
called opportunity guides.
So opportunity
guides may be guides
who come to us when we're
working on a specific project.
So let's say we're about to
begin doing some artwork--
oil painting.
We've never done it before.
But we have that
innately within our soul.
We might draw to us an
infinity of a guide who
knows is an excellent
oil painting
and will help us and
influence us that way.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
>>VAN PRAAGH: As a medium
when I was first developing,
I had two mediums
from the spirit world
who were opportunity
guides helping
me to develop that sensitivity.
And I also had a
doctor guide that
came through that helped me
that way, medically helped
my body as I was developing.
So we all of these
opportunity guides.
There are other guides
called-- we call joy guides.
And mostly, their children.
And I'll see a lot of
children around people who are
very depressed or very heavy.
What the child is trying
to do is influence them
with love, and
happiness, and joy,
that they don't have to
be heavy and depressed, so
those type of guides.
There are all different
types of guides.
They are very much
spiritual guides.
They're philosophers who
help with philosophy.
So really it depends upon
the life that you're living.
This is interesting.
Many people think
that your loved
ones who just pass over
just going into infinity
and that's it.
>>NOORY: Yeah, their gone.
>>VAN PRAAGH: They
become your guides, too.
Many will stay with
you and be a guide.
My mother who passed over--
she was a guide of mine.
And a medium said,
your mother is here.
She is a guide.
And I said, why would
my mother be a guide?
And he said, well, she felt
she didn't do enough for you
when she was living on
the Earth spiritually.
So she wants to help you now.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
>>VAN PRAAGH: So that
happens quite a bit.
>>NOORY: Would you
agree with that?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Totally.
100%.
>>NOORY: Yeah, interesting.
What about angels, now?
Where do they differ
from spirit guides?
>>VAN PRAAGH: So angels--
So I believe that there are
many, many different realms.
There are worlds within
worlds within worlds.
I do believe that worlds
within worlds within worlds.
And the one thing
I'm going to say
to you, which is a great one,
someone in my audience once
asked, what is the
spirit world say
about the level of the Earth
compared to the cosmos?
And the spirit
people said, well,
think of the Earth
as a grain of sand
on the beach that's how vast
and immense the cosmos is
and the universe.
There are millions and
millions of universes.
So there are various levels
and realms of beings--
all different types of beings.
So angels are just
another realm of beings.
That's how I'd best describe it.
And it's interesting that
these different realms--
if we think of it in realms
going up like a staircase,
that the higher realm has
to help the one in the lower
realm--
helps in the lower realm.
And that's really how it works.
They help those in the lower
realm to build them up,
to bring them up.
Because we're all connected.
We're all in it together.
>>NOORY: We sure are.
How about guardian angels?
Who assigns them to us?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I think that
many times before we come back
into the incarnation, that
you sit down with your spirit
guides and teachers there.
And there are those that
are assigned to you then
for a specific task that
have to be accomplished
during the lifetime.
So I think at that
time in between lives,
I think, is when we are
assigned our guardian
angels, those ones
that work out for us
and help us to
accomplish our task.
>>NOORY: I always think of one
of my favorite movies, James,
that my mother sat
me down to watch
when I was about six
or seven with her
called "It's a Wonderful
Life" with Jimmy Stewart.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Jimmy Stewart.
>>NOORY: And that
talks about angels
and what they do to save
you and things like that.
>>VAN PRAAGH: That's very true.
>>NOORY: That's real, isn't it?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Very real.
Very, very real.
Yes, very real.
Very real.
I could see you as an actor.
I could see you as a
theater person or an actor.
>>NOORY: The next
Omar Sharif, right?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I could
see that with you.
Yeah.
>>NOORY: Ascended masters.
What are they?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Ascended
master-- so another type
of guide, if you will.
But they are those beings
who are very aware who have
a lot of wisdom, if you will.
Again, it's so limiting
on this Earth level.
But the ascended masters--
those who have studied
have learned many, many things
from many different realms
who share with those
on lower realms
the wisdom that they have.
So it's their ascended masters.
>>NOORY: Were they
humans at some--
>>VAN PRAAGH: Some
are and some are--
>>NOORY: --point?
>>VAN PRAAGH: --not.
Many are not.
Many have never touched
the Earth before,
so some are way
beyond the Earth.
So they're all-- again, worlds
within worlds within worlds.
All different types of
beings, if you will.
And there are many
that do not look human.
So you have to understand that.
Many do not look
human whatsoever.
But the one thing-- this
is really interesting.
In my school online, I
have people get in touch
with their guides.
And an easy exercise that I
have them do is I have them--
I walk them through
a process of closing
their eyes and the breath.
The breath brings
us back to center.
And I say to them, ask
out, send out a thought.
Dear spirit guide, please come
behind me and put your hands
upon my shoulders, that
I might feel your energy
and know what your
energy feels like
and who you are
as far as a guide.
What kind of guide are you?
Are you a philosopher?
Are you a teacher?
Are you an opportunity guide?
Are you ascended master?
And it works very,
very well when
we open ourselves up and
surrender to the energy
that we're feeling.
And you can do that with
a whole series of guides.
I call them your team.
>>NOORY: I like that.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Your spiritual--
it works really well.
It's on my school
and my website.
>>NOORY: What has technology
done for you, for what you do?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Well,
I'm not a tech person.
I don't like tech.
I really don't.
I'm an old generation.
>>NOORY: Old school.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Old school.
And a lot has changed
in our lifetime.
>>NOORY: Do you send
text messages to people?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I do send text
messages, but not all the time.
I don't like the devices.
What happens for me, I feel
it reaches more people.
And that's true with my school.
My school online right now--
I reach over at
least 20 countries.
>>NOORY: You see, you couldn't
do that in the old days.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Couldn't
You had to go travel on a plane
and get to a place and lecture.
But I have people in
Africa, and Brazil,
and throughout Europe, through
the Middle East, by the way.
Middle East is very
big into spirituality.
China, Japan, all over.
And they love this topic that
I work with-- life after death.
And that in itself--
technology is great.
Marshall McLuhan said when the
world becomes technologically
advanced, it'll be
a global community.
And that is what's
>>NOORY: He was right.
>>VAN PRAAGH: --happening.
>>NOORY: And he also said
the media is the message.
>>VAN PRAAGH: The
media is a message.
Exactly right.
And it's used in the
correct, right way.
It can benefit humankind.
But it also can
destroy humankind.
But we have to have that
awareness that we bring it up
to a higher level of respect
and love for each other.
How can we enhance
another person's life?
>>NOORY: Good point.
>>VAN PRAAGH: How
can we enhance?
Let's think of it that way.
How can I use this technology
to enhance someone else's life?
How can I make some
else's life better?
>>NOORY: People ask me all
the time, how do you meditate?
You teach people that.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Yes.
And just become aware of this
beautiful, spiritual garden
that you create with your mind.
We'll take a deep
breath and exhale.
And as you see this
beautiful garden,
there is a bench sitting right
in the middle of that garden,
a nice marble bench.
Let's go now and sit
on that marble bench
and just feel all the
energy of this garden,
the colors of the flowers,
the life source flowing
through all.
You are connected to
every blade of grass,
every leaf on every tree.
Just feel the oneness
that you are a part of.
And as you feel
this completeness,
this oneness with
this world around you,
standing behind
you at this bench--
a being of light, one of
your guides comes close.
Invite them into your space.
Invite your guide to
come close behind you
and perhaps touch
your shoulders.
Become aware of
what they feel like.
Become aware of their
love, their energy,
that you are able
to identify them.
Invite them to be closer
to you enfolding themselves
around you, so you
truly feel this guide.
And as you let them come in,
talk to them with your mind,
with your thoughts.
Send out a thought saying,
give me a message, dear guide.
Let me hear what you
have to say to me.
Listen with your mind.
At the same time,
we give gratitude
to this lovely guide,
one of many guides.
But this one steps forward
to be with you today.
And thank them.
Gratitude is the right attitude.
So feel their energy.
Thank them for being
with you and just
acknowledge with your guide
a sign that they give you.
How will you know
when they're with you?
Let them give you a sign.
Perhaps you'll feel a touch on
your shoulder, wind upon you,
whatever sign they want
to give you personally,
that this guide is with you.
Let them do that now.
>>NOORY: You're almost
like a hypnotist.
[LAUGHTER]
>>VAN PRAAGH: Well, yeah.
>>NOORY: They were mesmerized.
>>VAN PRAAGH: That was a very
good example of the guide
exercise I was talking about.
But are very easy
ways to meditate, too.
You don't have to do that.
But it really works
with the breath, right?
So if we could just use our
thoughts, because thoughts
are things.
And imagine, let's say,
a beautiful light coming
through the breath
with the nostrils going
into the nostrils
or count to three.
We can do it right now, OK?
>>NOORY: Let's give it a try.
Teach me.
>>VAN PRAAGH: So into nostrils.
Count to three.
Out of the mouth--
count to three.
So we're going to breathe
in beautiful lights.
So breathe in, all the way down
to the bottom of your toes.
This beautiful light.
And imagine these lights
surround every muscle,
cell of your being.
And now, you exhale
out of your mouth.
Any old, stagnant
energy-- let it go.
Blow it out.
And again, now inhale
this beautiful light.
You are part of that light.
That light is part of you.
And now exhale all the old
ways of thinking, limitations,
let them go.
Let them go.
And one more time.
And inhale all the way down.
Good.
And now exhale.
Let it go.
And slowly open up your
eyes and be as one.
>>NOORY: I'm keeping you.
You make-- you feel good.
>>VAN PRAAGH: So that centers
you right away, right?
It centers you right away.
>>NOORY: Why does that work?
Or how does that work?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Because you
breathe in that freshness.
The breath is a gift from God.
It's a renewal.
It's a freshness of energy.
It's life force.
So you bring in life force.
And you're letting
go of that old stuff
that you're holding onto
that you no longer need,
that we think we need.
>>NOORY: And you let it go.
>>VAN PRAAGH: And you just
let it go and be replaced
with that new life force.
So you feel refreshed,
revitalized,
centered in your being.
So you can imagine if
you do that every day--
how you'd feel.
>>NOORY: So there's definitely
a tie-in between mind and body.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Without a doubt.
What you think, you become.
So everything you are
right now in your body,
whether it's a disease, whether
it's an ailment, whatever
it might be in your
body is because you
thought about it in your mind.
>>NOORY: How would James
Van like to be remembered?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I would
like to be remembered
by helping to change people's
hearts, open people's hearts
and minds.
>>NOORY: And you do that.
>>VAN PRAAGH: And I do that.
I try to do that.
I attempt to do that.
Everybody I meet, whether
it's at Starbucks or a waiter,
I will say something
kind to them.
And I will bring love to them.
Because everybody needs to
be acknowledged with love.
And I tried to do
that the best I can.
And I have fun with that.
>>NOORY: Well,
you're a human being.
So do you ever lose your temper?
Do you ever get mad?
>>VAN PRAAGH: Oh, sure.
I get mad.
I get upset.
I get frustrated,
I guess you'd say.
But I get really
frustrated myself.
I get impatient.
And I get impatient--
that ignorance.
I get impatient.
And I get really angry people
doing bad things to each other.
That-- I get really angry at.
>>NOORY: It's a tense
time right now, James.
>>VAN PRAAGH: That they
shouldn't do these things.
But I also-- then I
look at what we're
going to learn from-- like
let's say politically right now,
we're in a tough time.
But what are we
learning from that?
What's the bigger picture?
We always have to look at the
bigger picture, not the minute.
What's the bigger picture?
>>NOORY: And if we don't learn,
we're wasting the opportunity,
aren't we?
>>VAN PRAAGH: We're
wasting the moments.
Life is made up of moments.
What are you doing
with that moment?
>>NOORY: If you could talk
to the world tonight--
you're talking to
half of them now--
what would you tell them?
>>VAN PRAAGH: I would tell them
to bring that energy of love
and find God in
every single person.
Every single person is God.
They may look different.
They may speak a
different language,
but there's a commonality.
There's a creativity
in each person.
And I'm not talking
about religion.
I'm talking about
God and energy.
Try to find that
God in each person
and treat them accordingly.
Treat them as sacredness.
And treat them with love.
That's what I would say.
>>NOORY: That's
the way to do it.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Yeah,
love is the answer.
>>NOORY: How do people
find you, James?
>>VAN PRAAGH: They
find me two ways.
My website is www.vanpraagh.com.
And my school is the JVP
School of Mystical Arts.
>>NOORY: And spell your
last name for people.
>>VAN PRAAGH: It's V-A-N,
capital P-R-A-A-G-H.
>>NOORY: Super.
You're one of the good guys.
We know that.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Thanks, George.
You, too.
Thank you for having me.
>>NOORY: James Van Praagh
on "Beyond Belief."
Look, one day when
I meet my maker,
I'm coming back through him
to keep this show going.
>>VAN PRAAGH: Sounds good.
It's a deal.
>>NOORY: Thanks for
watching "Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]